Today, I released the first Release Candidate of Casbah 2.3.0, available for SBT users as  `"org.mongodb" % "casbah" % "2.3.0-RC1"`. My [release announcement](http://notes.implicit.ly/post/24009446396/casbah-2-3-0rc1) to [implicit.ly](http://implicit.ly) contains the details on all of the bugs fixed – I will also be posting another set of blog entries shortly outlining the specific improvements to the code and demoing fetaures.

It has been just about a year since the last major release of Casbah, which was version **2.1.5-1**.  A number of factors led to the delay in getting a major update out the door, for which I apologize.  Amongst other things I have spent much of the last year since Casbah's prior release on the road doing training, consulting and evangelization of MongoDB to users around the globe; I had less time for code among all these things than I expected!  Additionally, after releasing the **2.1.x** series of Casbah I embarked on what quickly morphed from Casbah **2.2.0** to **3.0.0** – a major refactoring and cleanup of 2+ years of API cruft and "I'm Gonna Learn Me Some Scala!" detritus.  In all the excitement to release a perfect release to end all releases, I did a poor job of making it easy to backport and maintain a compatibility series for **2.x** users – a harsh lesson in the importance of creating small, bite sized git commits that can be cherry picked.

## So What Happened to Casbah 3.0? And 2.2?

Casbah **2.2.x** is dead – **3.0.x** is certainly not!  When the work following **2.1.x** was begun, I had published a number of early snapshots as Casbah *2.2.0-SNAPSHOT*.  During this development cycle I found a lot of the aforementioned detritus such as overloaded methods (Casbah was begun as a Scala 2.7.x project and I never fully moved its core APIs over to use named and default arguments - some of these are corrected in Casbah **2.3.0** but in the interest of backwards compatibility with prior releases of 2.x, not completely). As I worked on coding improvements around these things the API drifted further and further away from compatibility and I chose to kill off the **2.2.x** series, planning the next release of Casbah as **3.0.0**.  In addition to that, I intended Casbah **3.0.0** to coincide with MongoDB **2.2.0** which will have additional features such as the New Aggregation Framework.  As MongoDB 2.2 hasn't been released yet, it became clear I needed to provide an updated Casbah release with many of the improvements but without many of the API breakages introduced in **3.0** - including a vastly improved build of the Casbah Query DSL which has stronger type safety and compiler checks thanks to the inimitable [Jon-Anders Teigen](http://twitter.com/jteigen). 

Casbah **3.0** is still very much alive and in development, with **2.3.0** representing a backporting of many of the changes and improvements from **3.0**.  Because of the abandonment of the original **2.2** development series, I felt it was saner to kill **2.2.x** dead and bring the backports into a **2.3.x** series. You can, if you wish, think of this as *Casbah 2.3 - The Search for Casbah 2.2* (The long rumored sequel to Spaceballs has been said to be called *Spaceballs 3: The Search for Spaceballs 2*).  

I will continue to support and improve Casbah **2.3.x** moving forward as well as completing Casbah **3.0** (still intended to coincide with the release of MongoDB 2.2). If you have any questions, please don't hesitate to contact me!

*Later tonight or tomorrow I will post an entry or two detailing all of the wonderful changes in Casbah 2.3.0 and how to take advantage of them.*
